[Applause]
I've got one [__] life and this is
it.
Jimmy,
it was not pre-ordained that I was going
to be a successful comedian touring the
world and being on TV. I just I knew
what I wanted to do and then I pursued
it. I was so broken. I was so stripped
of serotonin. It went from being on the
cover of the paper to going, you know,
this is morally wrong. I was having
panic attacks. It's [__] terrifying
because you think, is this my forever
now? And when you're depressed, it's the
appetite for life is just gone. What's
the thing that you're good at that you
could get better at that you could be
better than you last year? That's the
key thing. Cuz take that thing, if you
can find out what that is for you, and
then apply some hard work and time,
that's your luck.
Be happy. I think it's a it's a powerful
thing to aspire to. You know, when
you're on a plane and it's going down
and the oxygen masks come, you have to
grab your mask first or you're no good
for anyone else. You being happy makes
the people around you happier. Better
for your friends, better for your
family, better for the world.
When you clicked on this video, I don't
know what you were expecting when they
told me Jimmy Carr was going to be on
the Diary of a CEO. I don't know what I
was expecting, but what I got and what I
learned and the person that showed up is
not the Jimmy Carr that I know from TV.
It's not the Jimmy Carr that I've
watched on TV for many, many decades.
The Jimmy Carr that came here today is
quite honestly a genius, a philosophical
thinker, an expert on the topic of
happiness. someone that writes in his
brand new book about finding and
pursuing your purpose. Jimmy Carr has
typically been known for his very
comedic oneliners. What he shares today,
it's deep. It's profound. And when you
find out that he was a Cambridge
graduate, it kind of makes sense because
Jimmy is a very, very smart man. Not
just books smarts, he's life smart. This
podcast today is one of my favorite of
all time because it has everything. Not
just those profound truths that I know I
know will change your life, but also a
very remarkable, compelling, vulnerable
personal story. One that starts with his
mom and his dad. One that starts with
dyslexia and feeling rejected at a very
young age. one that journeys through
being cancelled, controversy, panic
attacks, depression, and ultimately
finding himself. He says it himself.
This is the Jimmy Car you don't know.
But I'll tell you this, this is the
Jimmy Car you should. So, without
further ado, I'm Steven Bartlett and
this is the Driver CEO. I hope nobody's
listening, but if you are, then please
keep this to yourself.
It's so funny because every time I do
this podcast, I always try and think of
a new place to start. But having read
your story and having read the stories
of my guests before they arrive, I
always end up starting in the same
place. So I was just sat there trying to
think of a new way to to come into it.
But I'm going to go for it. So your
childhood, Jimmy, very very pivotal. And
I I was reading throughout your
childhood about these really really
pivotal moments. pivotal moments of
changing school and family and mom and
dad. Take me to the the most important
context from your childhood. I suppose I
mean listen it's it's when you remember
stuff we're all um unreliable narrators
when we look back on our lives and I
think the gift of lockdown was that uh
memory and speed are inversely
proportionate that when you slow down in
life you remember more you kind of and
and it's a great time for kind of
recalibration and thinking well what
happened so the things that I recently
became a father so you're thinking about
childhood again in kind of this new way
and thinking well what are the what are
the things you would want for your child
what would you want to give them? And
also what were those key moments where
you get to decide who you are and I
think that the key bits in my childhood
were the moments where you become aware
you are a story you tell yourself. So I
moved schools when I was 16 and I was
kind of not a tear away but I was in
trouble and I was messing around and I
was with a uh a fairly rough crew. Uh
and I switched schools and told a
different story. Not to be Machavelian.
you just kind of arrived at the new
school and went well I guess I guess
maybe no one no one knows me here I
could just be whoever I want to be and
you become aware of how not consciously
but even at that early age aware that
you're not a noun you're a verb you're a
doing thing and you can do things
differently and you can do better and
then so that lesson obviously that you
then forget that and and you don't make
good on that again for a while so I was
kind of in my mid20s when the next big
kind of sea change of going right I'm
going to leave uh a job working for
someone and go on an adventure.
And it was I mean for me that kind of
mid20s thing was it's not childhood but
it feels like even at 25 I was um in an
archetypical way still a child because I
was living my life for someone else. I
hadn't really taken the reigns yet. I
hadn't really made a decision until I
was in my mid20s. So it felt like to me
I was like a big kid when I was 25 and
then suddenly at 26 yo ho ho a pirates
life for me.
I just I [__] off and joined the
circus and became a comedian and started
leading my own life in a way that I
think I mean part of the reason for the
book is I think a lot of people aspire
to that. A lot of people want to um want
to find their purpose and they want to
they want to pursue it and you know it's
very sad a lot of people don't get to do
either. And when you changed school at
16 years old and you talk about you were
able to kind of shed this identity that
that school and environment and the
teachers there had given you.
Well, I think you've got baggage,
haven't you? When you're even when
you're 16, you got baggage. You go to
six form and you're oh, you're the tear
away kid. You're going to do like you're
going to do, you know, this well in your
exams. It's it's a um your past
indicates where your future's going to
go. And it doesn't have to be that way.
At some stage you just have to you you
cut those apron strings or you cut with
the past and go no I could be academic.
You know I'm I'm a I'm very dyslexic and
I didn't really learn to read and write
till I was about maybe 10 or 11 with any
level of proficiency and then I managed
to get myself to Cambridge. And part of
that is like a force of will. You just
go right I'm going to I'll do that. I'll
figure out how to do it. I'll figure out
what the code is. And often I think it's
that thing of like the thing that comics
do incredibly well. Well, I talk about
like the superpowers of comedians. What
comedians do brilliantly is they're
great at p pat pattern recognition. And
that strikes me as like the most
important thing in life for humans is
pattern recognition. Well, that that
kind of works like that. How do you
write an A-grade essay? It's not about
knowing about history. It's about
knowing the structure of what that essay
looks like. And so, you kind of lift the
structure and go, "Right, well, I'll
just I I'll I'll write to that formula."
Crack in the code on stuff. And I think
at every level you're trying to crack
new codes. You're trying to get better
at stuff.
And and do you think if you go back to
that that changing school scenario
again, you were given this identity and
that identity came with a set of like
implicit instructions on who you were
which we then all for some reason
subconsciously believe and then obey and
then we start fulfilling.
100%. I mean I think the the the things
that dictate our lives are our beliefs.
Your your life is as good as your you
believe it's going to be. I think I'm a
real advocate that disposition is more
important than position and 95% of life
is how you look at it and 5% is what
happens to you. So the idea that you go
what what are you going to believe?
Well, most of our beliefs that the
beliefs that really affect us are the um
presuppositions that we make. We don't
even think about them. We just think
it's oh I'm not the kind of person that
does that. I'm not the kind of person
because I'm not from that background or
I'm not I'm not from showbiz. I don't
know anyone in showbiz so I'm never
going to be in showbiz. And then you
allow yourself at some stage you go,
well, [__] that. I'm gonna allow myself
to dream or to to uh to try and be more
than. But, you know, the premise of the
book kind of is there's nothing special
about me. It was not pre-ordained that I
was going to be a successful comedian
touring the world and being on TV. That
was not like a lock. I don't have a
irrefutable talent. I just I knew what I
wanted to do and you know what do you
want being the key question in life and
then I pursued it
kind of doggedly because I I found my
purpose and that strikes me as something
that's um achievable not you know I'm
not suggesting everyone goes out and
becomes a comedian but I want better
lives for everyone. I read um I read
that you said
you spent a lot of time cheering your
mother up.
Yeah. I think most comics I mean the
cliche is the comedian is depressed,
right? That's the go-to and it's such a
pleasing irony. Why wouldn't it be?
Because you go he's makes us laugh but
uh he's really down. You know the old um
you know the old story there's an old
joke about a guy is like super depressed
like he's going to kill himself. He's
really down and he goes to see a
psychiatrist and the psychiatrist says
well you need to you know you need to
cheer up. Grimmaldi is in town. The
great clown Grimaldi is in town. He's
the greatest clown the world has ever
seen. He's hil I saw him last. He's
hilarious. You won't even be able to
breathe because you'll be laughing so
much and you'll forget your worries and
you'll just be happy again.
And the guy goes, "But I am Grimaldi."
The great old joke about, you know, it's
like, "Okay, Tears of a Clown thing." I
think it's parents. I think my mother
was, if you talk to comedians, you'll
talk to a lot of comedians on this
podcast, right? So, I think the question
to ask is which parent was sick. It it
tends to be, you know, one of them, and
it tends to be either physical or mental
with my my mother was depressed. You
don't know that when you're a kid. You
just, you know, something isn't right.
No, you have to the atmosphere has to be
changed.
So you become very good at um at
changing people's states
and then that becomes your job. You lean
into that. That becomes a very important
thing that you place a lot of value on.
Now I hadn't put that together till I
was in my mid20s. But the idea of going
being able to change people's states is
a it's a it's an interesting skill set.
I mean, I like to think of myself as a
drug dealer,
but I'll never be taken by the feds
because the drugs are already on you.
You've got the the endorphins there.
You've got the good [__] in there. And
it's about letting that out in a very um
sort of organic natural high of
laughter. And I'm a huge advocate of
live comedy because people laugh so much
more when they're in a crowd. It's a
it's a social noise. It's very tribal.
It's the the idea of like we all belong
to this thing. If you you watch your
favorite show on on the phone on the bus
and you'll smile and it won't do you any
good physiologically, but if you see it
in a crowd of 30 people with all your
friends around, it's like laugh. You cry
laughing.
I guess that's why they put canned
laughter on TV.
I think to encourage Yeah. to encourage.
I mean they can laugh at things slightly
a myth but yeah they they uh uh they do
you know and it does encourage you to
kind of do a little bit but it's um it's
really about that thing of it being a
tribal thing where we we sort of want to
belong and laugh with something and I
kind of feel that as a comedian you're
part of a very long tradition there's
always been comics you know there was
comedians and there's variety acts and
then there's court jesters and then
there's trickster gods uh you know and
Nancy and the monkey king and all these
kind all these things from our our sort
of deeprooted culture. There's always
someone saying the other
slightly outside looking in.
Um I think being an immigrant I think is
an important thing with that. I mean I
don't read as an immigrant in any way,
shape or form,
just your average white guy, but and I
sound like I was privately educated, but
it's interesting in the book of like
people's perception of you. You have to
be aware who you are and you have to be
aware how you're perceived. They're both
important. And you I think acceptance of
that is like a it's like that thing of
what's the first step on the journey to
finding your purpose. It's like well you
have to know who you are. You have to
start with like there's an honesty to
comedy of going right this is what I've
got.
Going back to that the first person you
were sort of I guess assigned to cherup
which was your mother. What was did you
know at the time she was depressed?
No I just thought was normal. I I mean
genuinely like
na she was a lot of fun and she was very
charismatic and people liked her. I sort
of could see that. And then you could
see people are complexed and nuanced.
And you could see that she was, you
know, she didn't get out of her dressing
gown most days. She didn't she she
wasn't engaged in in a in a way that was
normal. She didn't take care of herself.
Um, and it's a great sadness. you know,
you kind of look back and you feel a bit
guilty that maybe you could have done
more. Or I think even the debate now,
the culture that we that we have at the
moment where people are talking about
mental health and they're talking about
getting help and what to do and talking
therapies, it feels like there's a whole
world that's open now that maybe things
might have been different if if it had
been, you know, 20 years later, but it
felt like she was quite isolated and and
depressed. One of the things you you
talk about linking to that is the the
root cause of a lot of things, you know,
mental ailments, depression, um
addiction is a lack of a lack of
purpose. And it's a, you know, like
hazarding a guess at what the the causes
would be. And with depression, um it
somewhat bizarrely seems to be quite
generational at times. Did you ever
figure out or hazard a guess in your
later life what caused her to feel the
way she did? I make a lot of cases in
the book for conflated words like you
know words that you sort of think they
mean the same thing but they don't.
There's that's sort of a theme in the
book of sort of going well I think
happiness and pleasure are different and
I think um envy and jealousy are
different and I think uh depression and
sadness are very different. I think some
of it was circumstantial which which is
sadness
and there you know sadness is better. If
you could choose between sadness and
depression, go with sadness because it's
circumstantial. It's about uh it's about
nurture. It's about what's going on in
your world, who you're with, what's
going what's happening that's getting
you down. Okay? But depression is a much
more serious thing. There'll be people
listening to this or watching this that
are that suffer with depression. It's a
serotonin imbalance in the head. It's a
proper medical ailment. And we never
think of it like that. We never think of
it like that, right? You've never told
anyone with uh cancer, snap out of it.
Come on. Come on. Let's snap out of it.
Let's go and get a drink. Come on,
cancer. Come on. But someone depressed,
you've
100% people have done that. Come on.
You're depressed. Come on. We're going
to get a drink. We're going You got
nothing to be depressed about. I'll tell
you what's great. You know, you do that
and and you go, it's so crazy when you
stop and think about suicide as a
symptom of depression, not as a thing
that's a standalone. It's a symptom.
there's an epidemic of it going on, then
people aren't taking it seriously. It's
it's a it's I I think comedy is a very
valuable tool as well because it lends
perspective
and really what is suicide? It's a it's
a it's a it's a permanent solution to a
temporary problem.
It's so sad. You hear about young people
that's it's just it's a heartbreaker.
And I think often that thing of like
purpose is the is the cure. H do you
think? Yeah. So what I don't know why
I'm asking you this question because
these are these are you know these are
very complex questions specifically
around mental health but I I I think it
all of these questions come from my own
place of like deep deep curiosity um as
it relates to to mental health the
apparent increase in it in our society
whether that's because more people are
you know labeling it or because there
more people are actually going through
those um those elements. Well, I think
there's I think there is a um
you know, if we take it over, you know,
not a huge not geological time, but over
like a 30-year time plan, uh what's
happened for the last 30 years? Well,
it's the rise of the individual,
right? We've all become uh the
individual has become more powerful and
the group or the tribe has become less
powerful. And that is not only a force
for good. There's a negative to that as
well. So people feel that families are
smaller, um, groups are smaller, people
feel like they go their own way. So
we've never been more connected and felt
more alienated. It's, you know, we're
set up to to to fail almost. There's a
generation of people that feel like
they're incredibly connected and they
have a huge number of friends online,
but they have no one to talk to. And
that's a it's a it's a that's a
difficult thing. And they don't feel
maybe part of a group. They always feel
a little bit other. So that's, you know,
if you there's a great book called
Selfie and a great book called Tribe. I
remember sort of reading them back
toback and thinking, yeah, there
something's going on here. And why do
why does everyone want to go to
Glastonbury? Why does everyone want to
go to a music festival? It's not
necessarily because they, you know, I
love that song. See that song anyway.
You play that song on your headphones.
But they want to feel part of something
and they want to be in a crowd with
other people and feel a sense of
belonging. There's there's something a
little bit our societyy's unbelievably
great and I love that kind of Steven
Pinker enlightenment now thing about
right it's the best it's ever been.
There's [__] terrible things
happening but it's the best it's ever
been. I love that positive attitude, but
there are serious issues, especially I
mean it seems especially for young
people, it seems like it's um I mean
part of the reason to write the book is
I have a son,
but also the people that come and see my
shows and the people that go well I
don't I don't know what to do
and yet you know and they come out for a
laugh or whatever and you go well I'm
not I'm the jester here. I don't have
any answers but this is what worked for
me. So sharing that felt like a um a
really a sort of privilege to be able to
do that. And you think about your life
and your childhood and the people that
you met along the way that made huge
differences with seemingly small
interventions.
The world seems to be hurtling more and
more in the direction of individualism,
loneliness. I mean the stats would back
that up that we're getting more and more
lonely as we're moving online. You know,
Facebook announced they're changing
their name to Meta last week and
they're,
you know, building the the metaverse,
which we're all going to live in. And
it's interesting how empathetic and
beautiful people are one-on-one.
You know, if you you've ever met someone
one-on-one that's a cancel culture is an
interesting thing to talk about, right?
Because I get cancelled at some stage in
the next two years. It just happens.
Let's just accept that for a joke I've
done online. It's already out there.
It's pointless me worrying about it. But
that thing of like one-on-one with
people, people are incredibly empathetic
and kind. And there's a thing that we're
doing now where we're not on a Zoom
call. We're across the table from each
other looking into each other's eyes
having a conversation. There's an
intimacy to that. There's like a there's
like a okay, we're going to have a
conversation here and we're going to see
each other's points of view and we're
going to talk about it. And it's a it
it's there's something about this that
goes back 10,000 years. Like people have
always done this. the online thing you
what are we missing from that with that
that immediiacy and I think the the
crisis in lockdown where people were
literally locked down and shut away it's
just it's not good for us
how do we change it
well I don't know I mean I think there's
I I don't know is is the answer I mean I
think there's the really simple [__] is
is not getting done
for me because it feels like this big
boat that's going in one direction and
it's speeding up. And what I mean by
that is we're actually building our
lives into the digital space which is
making us more socially connected online
but more disconnected in the real world.
There's an interesting thing going on. I
mean I it's interesting and terrible. Um
where people are I I sort of quote a lot
in the book. I use a lot of quotes
because I sort of think quotes are the
truth. Like it's everything else has
been burnt away. There's nothing left
but these six or seven words that just
sum something up and you go that's just
[__] that's stuck around for 50 years
for a reason. That's just [__] true.
So the I think it's Elellanena Roosevelt
that said, you know, comparison is the
thief of joy, which I love because we're
comparing our lives to everyone else,
right? We're the classic, you know,
millennial kind of phrase of like you're
comparing your insides to someone else's
outsides. But even there's another thing
layered on top of that now where I don't
know you online, but you have an online
profile and you might well be jealous of
yourself online because you look at your
pictures of yourself online and you're
always smiling and you're always with
beautiful people drinking a cocktail on
a beach, beautiful car, beautiful thing.
That thing of like you can't you're
disconnecting with how you feel and how
you you choose to express yourself
digitally. Um, so that there's it's a
it's an odd thing that's that's
happening. I think like feeling
connected to other people and laughing
with other people. I think it's here's
how we fix it, right? It's nature and
nurture, right? So oldest debate in the
world. Nature, nurture. What's
important? Well, who [__] cares?
Nature's the cards we were dealt, right?
That's what we got. We got this. I got
this. You got that. Okay. All right. You
win. So, so, but that thing of going the
nature nurture thing is right. You've
got the nature. That's fine. That's the
cards. How you going to play it is the
nurture. And I think there's a
perception that nurture is finished at
15, 18, 20, 21. At what stage do you
think you're done? I'm done. Off to the
world now. Going to kill it. Like it's a
nonsense. Nurture is like an ongoing
process of like and thinking about it
giving it even five minutes thought of
going right who do I like and why do I
like them? Well, I like I like who I am
with people. That's why I like them.
So when I'm with my child, I like who I
am. When I'm a dad, I like playing that
role. I like being that part. I like I
like who I am when I'm with my friend
Johnny and we're chatting about music. I
like who I am when I'm with, you know,
my my my friend uh Matt and we're
chatting about aliens or what, you know,
those things. And spending finding more
time with those people and laughing and
connecting with the people that make you
happy.
That seems to be the the you know, the
smart thing. I mean that you know I
suppose there simple [__] like you know
putting your phone away for a day. Have
you ever done that? We did it on our
last holiday.
My go
I haven't had a holiday for two years.
Yeah. But that thing of like we put our
phones in the we check the phone in the
morning to see no one interesting's
died. You don't want to miss a biggie.
You know what I mean? You don't want to
miss [__] Diana too. Whatever the
[__] So you put the phone in the safe
in the morning
and then you have your day and then you
check it in the evening. You give
yourself the the the rush of I've got so
many emails. Oh my god.
And and then it's it's interesting
though of that that feeling of
decompressing and most people don't
don't have that. Not that you know it's
not I'm not saying that digital world is
you know a terrible thing and it's
clearly the way we're going. So we have
to learn to to live with that.
We talked there about one half of your
parental equation.
Tell me about the other half.
Well, you know, I've just become a
father
and I'm acutely aware that it doesn't
always work out. I haven't seen my
father in 20 years, I guess. Um, it's a
long time.
Um, and I I don't have a a relationship
with him. And listen, there's there's
three stories, mine and yours, and then
the truth. Um, but that's the facts of
the matter is I don't have any
relationship with my father. So, that
makes me um that's another lesson in
life though, isn't it? She go, right, if
you don't have a father, don't be a
dummy about it. Don't not have a father.
Just find a different one.
F that archetype is so important to our
development. Having a mother is, you
know, when my mother died, I didn't go,
well, I guess, you know, the older
female nurturing
um archetype. I just I guess I'll live
without that. You go, you find other
people that are going to maybe not one
other person, but you find a you put
your team together, you put your nurture
together, and you you go, well, I need
to find those people. you need to find I
mean I suppose I'm lucky in the the job
that I do that you have certain you know
people are further down the road so if
you look to them as kind of mentors or
you look to them as as uh as people that
you want to impress and you want to you
know you're aware of that what you need
and and now you've had a son
that must be uh you know there was two
things you talked about that real really
really pivotal in recent times one of
them was the pandemic
and the other one was obviously the
birth of your of your own man. What are
the the top level, you know, shifts that
have occurred in you because of those
two events?
Well, I suppose I mean, I got I was kind
of late to fatherhood, I think, because
um I think it was I think
psychologically I think maybe I didn't
want to be uh I didn't want to be a
father because I didn't want to be my
father.
Uh and you know, so you find a different
way through. You find different models.
You know, I've got friends that are
incredible fathers and you kind of model
that and it's that thing of like
it's what humans do. We kind of go like,
"Okay, well, I could kind of do that. I
could see what he's doing there and
that's amazing." So, that felt like I
mean, it's such a I mean, everyone does
it. It's like not a big deal that I've
had a kid, but it it's a big deal in my
life, obviously. It's like it's uh it's
there's a quote in the book. I love
quotes. Um it's like having a medical
procedure where your heart now lives
outside your body.
I kind of there's a bit of me that kind
of I wish I'd done it sooner. And then
there's another there's another bit of
me that goes, I wasn't ready for it
sooner. I'm ready for it now.
Interesting. My friend said that to me.
He's just had a baby and he said, "Oh, I
just wish I'd done it sooner."
I'm thinking, really?
But, you know, but it got you to to
there. It's like it's it's funny.
There's a great Chinese expression, a
great old proverb. The best time to
plant a tree is 20 years ago. The second
best time is now.
They're pretty wise, those Chinese guys.
They know what they're talking about.
Going back to, you know, your university
time because I remember cuz just kind of
going through in chronological order. I
remember I was reading about how you,
you know, you leave the nest, you go and
get, you know, you go and get a you go
to Cambridge, which I thought was
amazing considering you're, you know,
you were an undiagnosed dyslexic.
Oh, diagnosed. Um,
at the time you were undiagnosed. Yeah,
I got diagnosed at college, but I only
got diagnosed as dyslexic to get a free
laptop. I mean, that was like I didn't
really particularly care. I didn't make
any odds. You just get long longer to
sit your exams, but it was um yeah, it's
a it was it was nice. I mean, I think I
wouldn't recommend it to young people
because I think it's um Cambridge is
still now very anacronistic. It's like
going to college in the 1950s.
It's like a time machine. It's like it's
just it's very old school. And I mean,
maybe it's changed a bit, but I don't
think it's changed much. It's like
living in a church.
Yeah.
It's cloistered in every sense.
Yeah. So it's, you know, it is what it
is. But there's, you know, it's also
what are you going there for? I think I
went there for
in an unthinking way sort of it was a
away from something. I think I'd
remembered at a very deep level not
being able to read when I was a kid and
kind of being in the special ed class
and then wanting desperately to prove
myself. And so you kind of get there and
get your degree and go, "Right, well, I
never have to worry about that again,
which is dumbest thing in the world." I
mean, you know, everyone with any kind
of education has educated themselves
because really, what do you remember
from college years ago?
Yeah.
Like it's whatever you're reading now.
And fast forward a few years, you get
your degree, you uh get a job at Shell
as a marketing exec.
Again, unthinking. Absolutely
unthinking. Like it just it wasn't like
it was like a binary thing of like going
I didn't make a choice when I was 16 to
stay on at school. That was just like
the sensible thing. What what's everyone
doing? We're all staying at school.
Okay. We're all going to go to
university then at 18. Okay. Right.
What's the best one? Okay. We'll try and
get to the best one. If you can't get
into that one, get into the second best
one. If not, you know, so you it's like
a conveyor belt. And then after
university was right, everyone's getting
jobs. Okay. I guess I'll get a job. But
it's amazing how little thought I put
into my life.
Amazing really. And when you consider
that I do something that is considered
to be uh you know very creative, you
know, I write jokes and tell jokes for a
living and you go, "Oh, I it was a lack
of imagination that kind of [__] me
and and it [__] you, right?" Tell me
how what were the symptoms of being
[__] by that?
Well, I think it was the the it was uh
again sadness, not depression, but in my
mid20s just thinking, is this it? Is
this all there is? It felt like it was a
trudge. I didn't have any purpose. I was
um working to live, not living to work.
And I think it's not not everyone's
going to get that. Not everyone gets
that break. And I'm very aware that it's
not like, come on, dummies, get a job
that you love and get up and you're
excited about every day. It's like it's
not easy for everyone. It takes an awful
lot of work to find out what that thing
is that's going to make your heart sing
and then, you know, you find something
you love doing and you never work again.
It's not an easy thing, but if you can,
it's worth betting your life on it.
You write about that in the book, the
two adventures we all have in our lives,
which is finding your purpose and
obviously going in the pursuit of it.
It sounds like yours happened crazy
early, like kicked out of school,
dropped out of college, and then went
right, I'm starting a company. Like that
seems
And then you'd left the company by the
time you were 27. You were you were
almost onto midlife crisis, I think, at
27. It's true. which is
it's it's completely true.
That's great though. I mean it means you
get to die at 50 and you've done
everything.
Exactly. Yeah. I
So what was what was the what was that?
Because do you see I mean I sort of talk
about a quarter life crisis
of being finding your purpose and
cutting the apron strings and and and
that's about I think it's about
responsibility.
It's about going oh I'm in charge of
this. I can't blame anyone else. This is
all me. This is all my fault. which
should be an empowering phrase but
sounds terrible but it's all my fault.
The idea that right I'm I'm in charge.
Uh and I think it's often that thing of
like the expectation of parents or
whatever it is the the idea that you're
living your life vicariously through
someone else or someone's living
vicariously through you rather is like
JK Rowling said this brilliant thing
about where do you draw the line? Where
do you draw the line on taking
responsibility for your life? Because if
a 16-year-old kid says to me, "Yeah, I'm
kind of [__] up, but my parents are
dicks." You go, "Oh, that sounds fair
enough."
Yeah. Okay. But if a 40-year-old says
the same thing, you go, "Motherfucker,
please. Come on."
Yeah.
You're 40. Where do you draw the line?
The answer is somewhere. Somewhere you
draw the line. And there'll be 16 year
olds listening to this going, "Yeah, I'm
not blaming anyone for any anything. I'm
just I'm I'm doing this myself."
Where do you draw the line?
I think I was about 25.
You think 25 is where you got to take
No, no, That's why I do for you. Okay.
It's different for everyone. It's going
to be it's your road to Damascus. It's
your oh this is my one life. I mean I
think my loss of religious faith was a
very important part of my um
same
life. I think it was a huge thing of
going religious faith faith for me was
the ultimate in procrastination. It was
about the next life.
Yeah. And it was also there's
potentially a puppet master and a judge.
So, I've just got to play to this Bible
potentially or you know what when I was
the same. I lost my religious faith in
Christianity when I was 18,
right? I was a bit late to the party. I
was about, you know, 24 25 something
like that.
And it's it's um and I don't view it I
don't view atheism as like a this isn't
going to be um Christopher Hitchens and
Dawkins, you know, it's not like it's
not like a dry intellectual
aesthetic. It's like it's a rush of
blood to the head. It's like one [__]
life and this is it. And we're in it
right now and there isn't a second to
waste. Let's do this. What are we doing?
What am I doing? What's exciting? What's
fun? What's and and kind of stand or
fall, it doesn't matter.
Yeah. When I realized that I was an
atheist after trying to convince my
brothers of a Jesus and a and a god and
then really realizing I was an atheist,
I spent two years absolutely obsessed
with atheism. So, Dawkins, I watched
every video, every book you could read.
And then I was an antagonist to to
religious people because it's almost
like I was trying to
still at the center.
Yeah. It was still And
you don't lose it overnight. So it's
still it's like it's like people that
are you know
people with you know oh well I I live as
a um you know a hippie commune with no
belongings. You're still putting money
at the center. Yeah. Exactly.
You're kind of it's still the focus of
that religious thing of going well I've
lost my religious belief so now atheism
is my new religion.
Exactly.
It's like an addict never really gets
over an addiction. and they just get
addicted to something new.
Yeah.
And I think that's why I think purpose
is the thing.
And I think purpose as well for someone
who's had a religious upbringing to go
right well, I'm going to what's the new
thing? What are the new rules for me?
What are the rules for what's my
morality? What's my life going to be
like? So that's it's very exciting. I
mean, it really feels like it's a I
would encourage people to kind of think
about it. And for me, it was just the
the basics. I don't know how you lost
yours, but mine was like so basic.
It was exactly the same. I read I read
how you lost yours and it was I it was
exactly the same.
If I'm right about this
then all those it's not Yeah. It's good
news for me and the other Christian boys
but it's very bad news for Ishmael.
Yeah.
[__] hell, TK. It's bad news for you.
Yeah. So you you went somewhere.
I went to Jerusalem. Yeah. I went to
Jerusalem and I had a look around and
you go,
"Oh, this is some [__] This is
Disney." I mean, Jerusalem's one of the
most beautiful cities in the world. I
would encourage anyone to go there. It's
it's wonderful and I I love Israel. But
you you go there and you go, "This is
900 years old, not 2,000 years old,
please. This is let's stop kidding
ourselves. This is not none of this
happened. This is Disneyland." Um, and I
think there's a stage of throwing the
baby out with the bathwater. And then
you read more when I don't know if
you've kind of done this, but you you
read about the myth and what it is and
what it you know, the story of Christ is
interesting. It's an interesting story,
but the story the the the
the myth of it is interesting, not the
factual character.
I couldn't care less. Um, but that thing
of like what remains when everything is
burnt away. That's what I get from that
story.
Okay. So, if you burn everything else
away, what's essential you? What's the
thing that's left when there's nothing?
That's interesting. You go through
trials in life. You go through, you
know, hard times and what remains. And
when you lost your faith on that point,
did you were you kind of destabilized
by Yeah. unanchored almost, you know?
Yeah. I didn't leave my job to be rich
and famous on TV.
I left my job
for I don't Yeah. Yo ho ho, a pirates
life for me. We're doing comedy. I'm
doing a gig above a pub. Someone gave me
20 pounds cash in hand. That was I mean
it was crazy. I'd had like a good job,
but it's that thing where you go, the
good is the enemy of the best. How much
to not live your life? How much to not
follow your dreams? How much do I have
to give you across the table? Now, I'm
saying this to you now, right? And
you're you're a wealthy man. You're an
investor or whatever. So, it's going to
be a high figure. But for most people in
their mid20s, they've just left college
or early 20s, they've left college. and
you go,
they give you 35 grand to compromise on
everything and always be tired and just
work to my time and people go, "Okay,
that's the the thing of like working for
someone else is I think that that's the
big shift, right?" So the the my standup
is a metaphor in the book. I'm not
trying to get people to become
stand-ups. Frankly, I don't need the
[__] competition. But the idea of
going going and doing your thing, even
if it's less successful, but doing your
thing, being your boss, being your CEO,
great. Like, I'm all about that. When
people tell me they've started a little
business or done a little thing, you
just go, "Yeah, [__] boss." Because
you you get like serial u entrepreneurs
because they do it once and go, "Yeah,
I'm not working for anyone. I'm not."
Let's challenge this. So, when I started
my business, I had many, many bosses cuz
I had lots of clients. So, I've got
people that can call me at 3M and just
give me [__] And I think even as you
know when I and then I had investors as
well and they can call me and give me
[__]
Yeah. But we listen, Bob Dylan got to
this before we ever did. We all have
someone to serve, right? That's just the
the nature of life, right? So, listen, I
work for myself and I'm a [__] boss
and making huge money. I've got an
audience to serve every night. Got 2,000
people that need to laugh for two hours
three times a minute.
[__] hell.
And that's my boss, right? So, I've got
to lean into I've got to make sure that
they're happy or none of this can
happen. So, we all have people to serve.
Of course, that's that's part of life.
You you have But you find out you do it
on your terms, in your way. Great. I
don't mind the call at 3:00 a.m. I don't
mind the audience wanting more. I don't
mind you, that's great. The travel,
anything that's all fine because I have
the true north of a of a purpose,
you know. And then it's it's that other
thing on life where you kind of go I
write in the book quite a lot about
money about the idea of like what is it
what's going on there because it's such
a powerful thing we spend so much of our
lives we give up so much for these
tokens and it's that classic line that
you know to buy [__] we don't need to
impress people we don't like
it's it like
who was it the it's Byron has the quote
money is a magic lamp
you You have to know what to wish for.
You have to know what you want.
Otherwise, what are you doing?
Like, I mean, we're sort of in the city
of London now. There's people working in
the city that are just like they're
making huge money and they're they're
buying the Rolex. But what for?
Quick one. Um, when Jimmy got here off
camera before we started chatting, he uh
he walked up and he saw the Hu bottle on
the table and I went to explain to him
what Hu was and he goes, "Oh, you don't
need to tell me. I I drink Hu all the
time." And he went on to explain that he
has hu before he goes up on stage
because it it's nutritionally complete
and gives him all the vitamins and
minerals and energy that he needs before
he goes up on stage. Um, and that's
exactly why I have here. And that's the
beauty of having a podcast sponsor that
you so deeply believe in and one that
has genuinely transformed your life.
I've just landed back from Indonesia. I
am all go because my entire schedule
because I've been away for four four odd
weeks has been condensed into the month
of November and I am running right now
at a tremendous pace to get everything
in my schedule ticked off. Hule is there
to make sure that my health and my
nutrition is ticked off at the same time
as my professional ambitions. That's the
role it's always played in my life. Zoom
me right in on that moment then. You're
working at Shell as a marketing
executive. There's a day, is it a
moment, is it a comment where you think,
"Fuck this." And then to go from there
to comedian. Yeah.
It doesn't make any sense to an external
one.
It doesn't. I mean,
make it make sense for me, please.
Okay. So, I had a boss there, a guy
called Mike Har, who I'm recently kind
of got back in touch with a little bit.
So, I was I was working for Shell. I
initially worked for an advertising
agency.
He's the one you call an [__] in your
book.
No, I'm joking. Joking,
but that would that was good. Uh, so
he's he's that's a typo. Um, it's funny
the uh so I was working for an
advertising company and then I figured
out okay advertising this is this is
[__] Who's who are these people
calling me asking me for [__] are
marketing managers right? Get into
marketing. So got a job with Shell. So
I'm working for Shell and then I kind of
figured out look I'm not happy here. I
was kind of low energy. I was not the
funny guy in the office. I was just like
this is this is [__] We're all
working here for shareholder value. I
couldn't give a [__] And uh I I went,
"Okay, well, what's a cooler job? What's
a better version of this?"
So, I went and did like the McKenzie
Boston consulting interviews. So, I was
like I said to my boss, let's nice guy,
Mark, Mike, I said, "Look, I'm going to
I'm going to go and try and get a job
one of these things." And he sat me down
in his office and just went,
"No, I can't see it. I can't see it.
just you're just gonna have the same
problem somewhere else. I just don't see
it. And that was kind of enough. It was
enough that he saw me as like a funny,
nice guy and just went, "Yeah, this
isn't for you. You're in the wrong
stream." You know, so the ladder, the
analogy of the the the ladder that
you've climbed is leaning against the
wrong wall. And there's no finer
like like ripping up your CV
metaphorically going, I never need this
again. No one needs to know how I did in
my A levels ever again. No one gives a
[__] about my degree. I mean, maybe some
of this stuff will come in handy on Qi
10 years later, but otherwise, who
cares? And you're just off doing your
thing. And it's, you know, none of that
was wasted. I mean, an education is a
incredible thing. What a gift to have.
Um, but it just felt like it was it was
kind of freedom. And they they did a
little voluntary redundancy thing which
was meant to get rid of the dead wood.
It was meant to get rid of people at,
you know, 55, 60 and just get them out
the door so more people could come in.
And I was on the management graduate
scheme thing, blue chip thing. I just
went, "Yeah, can I what would I get if I
left?" They went, "Five grand." And I
went, "I'm out." [__] great. Not only
am I leaving, they give me my money to
leave.
And I was, it's weird. I had like a
reputation when I started doing comedy
of being um the hardest working comic
because I went out 300 nights a year
every year. for the first 5 years just
like was like just honor.
I was so feckless at work.
It's a really good indication of if
you're doing the right thing
if like I used to put in a meeting at
11:00 a.m. on a Friday and another
meeting in at 2 a.m.
so that I could go to a movie in
Leicester Square and be back and just
go, "Oh yeah, nothing happened." Just
like a lazy [__]
Isn't that so interest? I was exactly
the same. I I my attendance and score
was 30 40%. But then and in fact it
wasn't in my business class. was 100% my
business class and then when I left
school as this lazy kid that was going
to fail, I outworked everybody at the
thing that I love doing business.
It's interesting, right? So, it's a
really good feedback loop of like for
anyone listening to this of going, what
do you find easy? What you know, what's
your edge? That's the other thing I talk
about a lot in the book, your edge.
What's your thing, the thing that you do
better than anyone else? You don't have
to be the best in the world, by the way.
You don't have to be better than anyone
else. But what's the thing that you're
good at that you could get better at
that you could be better than you last
year?
That's the key thing because take that
thing if you can find out what that is
for you and then apply some hard work
and time that's your luck.
Be lucky. I always say that like be
lucky. But that that's what I mean by
luck. Luck and happiness being sort of
the same in German. It's a lovely uh
sticky phrase like be lucky. Like if you
put that in you're you're buying lottery
tickets every time, right? So that hard
work you put into the business. It's
like lottery ticket, lottery ticket,
lottery ticket, lottery ticket. And hey,
presto, one of them hits because you're
there all the hours, working all the
hours, and you're working smart. You're
working at the thing you're best at.
You're kind of super focused on that. I
want to talk to you about that point
about hard luck because that's been um
stigmatized in our society. But before
that, you said something which is f, you
know, find that thing within you that
you can be the best at, the thing that
you enjoy, etc., etc. When I when I say
that to people, they always say to me,
"But Steve, how how do I find the thing?
How do I find my purpose? Is it just I
sit down with myself and make a list? Do
I
Yeah, I mean, I I literally went through
uh there's two books. Um Zen and the Art
of Making a Living I would recommend to
people. It's still available. And
there's a book called um What Color Is
Your Parachute?" They're quite
corporate. both of them. Even Zen and
The Art of Make a Living is quite
corporate, but it's basically you write
essays about yourself and you you it's a
workbook. It's like a big chunky
workbook. I did both of them and it kind
of and for me I kind of then slightly
threw it away and went show business.
But it's interesting of like knowing
yourself like who really knows you? Your
friends probably know you. Ask them ask
them what they think. That's it's an
interesting sort of process to kind of
go like and you could be a ripe old age
and this would still apply like do you
know who you are, how you're perceived
and who you really are, what you feel
like. Um because it's it's that thing
where you got like those personality
tests online are not dumb to do. You
know that there's that um
breaks no there's a Jordan Peterson one
understanding myself. like 100 questions
and it tells you things that's that's
worth
I had a crack at that recently and
really enjoyed it like because you get
the results and go I agree with that. So
that's surprising. Well, you know, it's
it's interesting. It's almost like a um
a um a horoscope like everyone likes
their horoscope, right? Because
everyone's a little bit egotistical and
like I wonder what it says about me. And
I think those personality tests kind of
can be very very useful for going well
how are you going to find your edge?
What's the thing you enjoy? Is it being
with people? Is it on your own? Are you
introverted, extroverted? That
MyersBriggs thing might lead you in a
direction of going, "Well, I can't be
I'm not going to be a salesman. I'm
going to be and these are jobs we're
talking about as opposed to um something
beyond that like a purpose, a career, an
entrepreneurial spirit.
Um
people find that. So I've I've done the
MyersBriggs, I've done this, I've done
the Jordan Peterson test and it's clear
that my passion is X, but I'm in that
job unthinking as you describe it and
I've got a mortgage to pay. I've got,
you know, bills.
Well, I mean that thing of like I nearly
fell into that trap. I was like the
things you own end up owning you. Like
there's nothing you can buy in the mall
that you give a [__] about in 5 years
time. There's nothing like like in the
early phase of your life. Don't [__]
buy anything because it's like, you
know, the things you own end up owning
you. Like the payments on a sports car
nearly stopped me going into comedy
because you go, well, what ties you
down? If I bought a house in, you know,
the ' 90s when I was, you know, working
for Shell. It would have been a great
investment and I never would have left
because you're paying that mortgage,
you're doing that thing, what do you
need? You know, what do what do you need
the money for? What are you using the
money for? You know, when you take away
the commute and you take away the um the
lunch that you're buying and the night
out, the weekend and a couple of drinks
to, you know, because you need some fun,
it's it's it's amazing how little when I
first year in comedy, I made literally
no money. I mean, literally nothing.
First money I got was £80 in cash for
going to driving 5 hours to Plymouth and
back. But I had a little bit saved. I
had this like five grand from Shell and
I was living at my mom's uh initially.
So, it was like it's fine. I had enough.
You know that that amazing story about
um Kurt Vonager and uh Joseph Hela?
Yeah.
They're at a party in New York and the
part is [__] incredible. Right. So
the it's in the Hamptons, right? So the
guy's he's married to a supermodel. He's
got warholes. He's got Picassos. The
house is unbelievable. Like the Wolf of
Wall Street party that incredible
amazing party. Everyone's there. And
Kurt Vonager, incredible writer, says to
Joseph Ella, "This guy made more money
one day last week than you made out of
catch 22." Like laughs at him. And
Joseph Ella goes, "Yeah, but I got
something he'll never have." Enough.
What's enough? What's enough for you?
What's What's enough? What's the There's
two things going on, right? There's
There's safety and security, right?
There's our caveman thing of like going,
"Right, I need we need to be secure.
That's about a bear not attacking,
right? We feel pretty secure in our
worlds, right? And then scarcity is
about, it's another caveman thing of
like going, "Okay, so we need to collect
some stuff cuz winter is coming, so we
need some we need some coin. We need a
little bit of gold to take care of us."
How much is enough? I mean, there's
going to be a trillionaire next five
years. There's going to be someone's
going to be a trillionaire. It's going
to be in the news. You know why? Because
a billion wasn't enough. And the
millionaires are billionaires
trillionaires. But they're working for
money. The money is the is the important
thing. It's the that's what that's the
whole center of their being.
It's interesting because as I reflect on
my childhood, I was clearly the one of
the big drivers for my success was
insecurity. Broke family, black kid in
an all-white school. Um parents were
never in the house. I'm going to school
every day with [__] stained trousers
and stained t-shirts and no money. So
like this this deep insecurity must have
been like sort of burnt into me that
like if you get money Steve then you
won't feel ashamed anymore.
It's it's interesting. I think it's a
really interesting point because as
someone that lost their faith.
Um I think fame and fortune are the
secular heaven.
Like we get rich and famous and
everything's okay. There's no problems
when you're rich and famous.
That's what I thought.
Everything's fine. Well, of course,
because it is like a if you think about
like legacy now becomes
the afterlife.
Yeah.
And fame and fortune become uh the
recognition of people that we don't know
becomes a type of heaven.
So I think that's a it's a perfectly
rational thing to to you know are you
moving towards something or away from
something? Well, in an ideal world it's
kind of a mix of the two. And at what
stage do you personally and I think
probably if I was I'm not a
psychotherapist but I would say you need
to build some ritual around it and I'm
sure you did when you sold your company
or left but build some ritual have a
trip do something shamanic and go we did
it we're okay we have enough.
Yeah.
And now focus on towards something.
But that's like that part of your life
is kind of over now. Right. It's like
the the what was that thing for you?
What was the
kind of trying to trying to escape pain
and get to a point of I guess freedom
and freedom is a very psychological
thing. It's the freedom from shame,
freedom from not being able to, freedom
from having to do things you don't want
to do. And I think really freedom from
shame. I think that's probably at the
very heart of it.
Oh, that's I think that's what it is.
It's very deep, man, because it's it's
that thing where you go,
I feel um empathetic towards the younger
you. That's like a tough thing to have
to go through.
But you go kind of great. Kind of great.
Look at what look at how far you got
on away from.
Yeah.
Without even the towards without even
the amazing kind of, you know, and it's
it's like, well, what next? That's a
it's a sad story. But then you you you
look at people that got given everything
and have done nothing because they had
no sense of purpose. They had no fire
under them. I had no I think um
yeah it's it's it's kind of an inspiring
story but then it's you know there's no
I suppose it's like what what's going to
motivate you next what's going to be the
thing that you go you know what do I
want to do
and this is exactly it so you think
about how important purpose is for
people to feel stabilized and fulfilled
etc as we've talked about earlier and
then you think about these people that
are they're striving for a million a
billion a trillion.
Well, think about what a midlife crisis
is, right? So, I talk a lot about
midlife crisis in the book and you go,
"Well, midlife crisis is someone that's
found their purpose and they've done
their thing and then they've gone, is
this it?"
Yeah.
Is this it? And then they want something
like excitement. So, what do they buy?
Sports car. Is it exciting? I don't
[__] know. I mean, maybe. If you're
super into cars, I guess it's good. But
like, it's all advertising speaks to
this, right? I know I'm right cuz all
advertising ever is about it's no longer
about the functionality of the product.
It's about the well what what do you
want? You want to you want to feel like
uh
self-esteem
like self-esteem? Great. Rolls-Royce.
You want excitement? We got Ferraris for
you.
You want your dick up? We got a Porsche.
Whatever the thing is the you know you
got that that kind of there's a
different one and they're playing on
different emotions. And I think being
aware of I mean I come back to it all
the time. What do you want is the
fundamental question.
Like in any scenario, when you sit down
to eat, what do you want? What do you
want from life?
What do you want? What's what's the
thing that you want? And often it's it's
often asking that question multiple
times because the first answer tends to
be
[__]
Well, I think wishing wells work, right?
But they don't work when you think they
work. It's nothing to There's no magic.
The magic is, if there is any, knowing
what to wish for, knowing what that
thing is. You know, someone says, "I
want a million pounds." You go, you
don't know what you [__] want. You
want tokens for things that you might
want in the future. What do you want?
What are you doing? What are you trying
to be? Who who are you trying to become?
I ask people this, young people
specifically this question, and they
will say things that are all about
external validation. So I want to be
like you know the one variation of
famous that you know they might say
public speaker and you say why do you
want to be a public speaker and really
when you get to the crux of it what they
actually want to be is they want the
admiration that they think public
speakers get because you know their dad
didn't talk to them or something.
Yeah. But I could I could see that the
idea of going I think a lot of that is
like
that tribal thing of going I want to be
recognized. I'm in a very privileged
position in that I'm famous. And I would
argue
that's the norm. That's the norm for the
longest time in human history that
everyone knew everyone. We used to live
in what for like 10,000 years. You know
what? Longer. The longest time we were
we were in tribes between 60 and 100
people. Everyone knew everyone. A
stranger was a weird thing.
And now we see strangers all the time
and we act like it's normal, but it
ain't. And so that desire to belong, to
be famous, what is was ever thus. It's
always been that way. There was a
there's a you know it was in ancient
Rome people wanted to be famous and
wanted to be adored and wanted to be
that's like a it's valid and and you
know how do you deal with that? How do
you
how do you get that thing and if if it
helps them strive I think like I make a
real distinction between jealousy and
envy
in in the book and I talk about jealousy
being bad. I don't want you to have
that. I don't want you to have that. I
don't necessarily want it but I don't
want you to have it. [__] that guy. He
shouldn't have that. Why do you get
given that? That's some [__]
Envy is really good. Envy is like, it's
what you want. It's like motivation.
It's like, oh, that guy's he's got an
electric scooter that looks really cool.
I'm going to get one of those. Great.
You know what you It tells you what you
want. It tells you what the what's the
thing that you're attracted to. So, I
think it's like it can be a real force
for good. So that thing of like when you
were a kid and you're looking at the
other kids
and they're suited and booted and clean
and tidy going to school and their
parents are there and you go right I'm
building that for me.
I I investigated this particular topic
in my in my book at great length but I
want to ask you the question as if I
don't know the answer because I want to
get your take on it. Um I agree with
everything you said and I I al
especially this point about knowing that
you're enough now. Um, in my book, I got
to a point in chapter 18 where I'm like,
how do I know that I'm enough right now,
but also get the purpose and fulfillment
that comes from ambition and striving
for more? And it felt like a
contradiction like I am enough. I have
everything I need.
Yeah. I think we're talking about here
we're talking about gratitude. It's that
thing of like you're grateful for what
you got. You're grateful for what you've
got. Just the solid state. If you lose
everything tomorrow, you got your
health,
right? And there's people out there that
don't. and you've got friends around
you, great. You you know that gratitude
can't be stifling. You've like
practicing gratitude. I mean, they've
done all the statistical studies on it.
It makes such a difference to your life
to be grateful for what you have and to
go, "Right, this is [__] amazing."
Like I, you know, the older you get, the
more your friends die, the more you go,
[__] and never got to see this, never
got to enjoy that thing, never got to
sad. had a friend pass away recently and
you you just you become aware of your
mortality and you're so grateful to be
here and to be in this game and to be uh
around. But that gratitude can't stop
you from going, but I also want to go
further and farther. And I think the
great thing about being a comic is we're
brilliant with failure. We we made
friends with failure a long time ago.
We've died many times on stage. I've
written more jokes that don't work than
you.
so many more. You may not have written
any jokes that don't work. I've written
thousands of them. But that thing of
like that feedback loop of failure is so
it it's it's such a great life lesson to
learn because you go, "Well, look, I can
fail all the time and I'll fail and I'll
fail and I'll fail and I'll eventually
I'll fail so many times I run out of
ways to fail and then I'll we'll call
that success." And you kind of you build
and build and you kind of go, well,
what's the next thing I'm going to do?
I'm very lucky because I have a job
which is it's a task without end. And
that's where I think happiness lies in
those tasks without end where you go,
right, I'm going to spend my time trying
to be a better comic. You I'm going to
try and write in a different style. I'm
going to try and be I'm going to try and
be a goat. I'm going to try and be on
the Mount Rushmore of comedy. Now, I
know that probably won't happen, but
I've got a [__] lottery ticket and
I'm allowed to try and do it. And that
feels like an incredibly that feels like
a life's journey.
I don't know if that did that answer the
question. I don't know if it did.
Perfect. Yeah.
But then the the the question was about
No, you did because you reframed
beyond
you reframed my point which was um about
knowing you're enough. You reframed it
to gratitude and when and gratitude and
ambition can coexist.
Yes. But it's a tricky one though, isn't
it? Because sometimes you feel like am I
being ungrateful by wanting to more?
Yeah. And also and how much of a kind of
you kind of go gez I've already got a
lot of stuff. Do I need any more stuff?
Do I need any more? But it's I guess
it's not about
things or people. It's about how we
spend our days ultimately. So it's not
about like there isn't a god. No one's
keeping score. There's no one from above
who's going to go at the end of your
life. Okay, let's take a look at the
stats. And in my head, I kind of wish
there was someone going you did that
many. So what's happiness? I've got a
couple of theories on happiness. I think
flow states are where happiness lives.
What's a flow state? So I know
if you get into a state where you lose
track of time that's a pretty good
indicator. A lot of people get it with
uh sports. Okay. So you you're doing
something that you so enjoy. You're so
engaged in this activity you forget even
where you are. You might get it playing
video games. I get it on stage where I'm
just in this moment and I enjoy it. I'm
totally engaged and I'm I'm in the flow.
You see musicians kind of embody it on
stage.
Spend as much time in a flow state as
you can in life. If that can become your
job, then tremendous. That is that's
success.
Everything else is who cares. But that
thing is like that's amazing. So what's
your flow state? What's the state?
What's the thing you do where you go
this is this is my [__] I mean what is
it
for me?
Yeah. Ah, a lot of things come to mind.
One of them is um I've got this show
that's touring at the moment. It's in
the London Pladium in in February. Um
and I was as you were saying that I was
imagining sitting in the chair on stage
with with my choir and it that feels
like my flow state feels like I'm just
on my own just floating.
You'll try and hold on to that moment.
Yeah.
You'll try and it's like quicks because
it's like the time will just float by
and you know you'll be there and there's
kind of a high before the high even
thinking about it. M but that thing of
going that's next February
that won't do you're going to need that
once a week you're going to need that
once a day like more of that like
leaning into that edge of going that's
if that's where I'm happy
that's where you should be
this is lovely actually I think
I think kind of there's it's a I think
the reason sort of panel shows are so
popular on TV is because this is missing
from our culture like this is how we
should end every day
the reason podcasts are blowing up is
because people desperately want to be in
a conversation and there's something
very intimate about podcasts. There's
something about the long form and
listening that's really
when you don't do them on Zoom.
Yeah. You can't do them on Zoom. There's
no eye contact. My other theory on
happiness is it's expectations exceeded.
Oh yeah.
Because listen, what birthdays are [__]
right? New Year's Eve is [__] waste
of time. Amateur drinkers. I've never
had a good New Year's Eve.
New Year's Eve is [__] all. And why?
Because the expectation is this is going
to be the best night ever. We're It's
going to be huge. Everyone's going to be
there. Even if everyone is there, and it
is a really good night, you go, "Yeah,
but I thought it was going to be amazing
and it was just really good."
And then sometimes on a [__] Tuesday,
someone goes, "I just went I bumped into
the guy and then we went to a thing and
then we ended up at a had a [__]
great time." It's the It's that thing of
like tricking yourself into kind of just
lower your expectations. Maybe a little
bit less time looking at what everyone
else is doing on holiday on Instagram is
pretty healthy
and looking around trying enjoying the
little simple pleasures and oh we
ordered in and the food was [__]
amazing and it arrived hot great.
Does that link to your point about
comparison being the thief of joy? Of
course. Yeah. Compare and despair.
Everyone's having a better time. All
check Instagram now. We're going to feel
like dummies for sitting here having a
really interesting conversation. Oh
[__] We should be [__] water skiing
in the Amazon. Ah, we're dummies. But
it's being where you're at, right? So
it's
and that's raising our expectations of
how our lives should be going. When I
see Timmy doing his jet skiing and
but it's it's oh the places you won't
go. Oh, the things you won't do to be
where you are. There's a million people
you're not because you you did this and
you didn't do that. Now, you could have
gone down another road. Maybe you could
have been a great sportsman. Maybe you
could have been a great academic, but
you didn't go down that road. You went
down this road. And enjoying that and
being where you're at is kind of it's
kind of important. you know, once you
commit to something, it's like,
you know, you it's fine, but you can't
like all these different I think it's
it's overwhelming at the moment what's
going on in in social media.
Um, because it just feels like you're
constantly bombarded by options and easy
lives.
You know, the latest kind of iteration
of the fame heaven myth is reality
stars. So the there's a big difference
between again another conflation but
being a celebrity and being famous.
I'm famous but I'm not a celebrity. I'm
famous for something that I do but a
celebrity is just themselves the queen
or a Kardashian. They're just themselves
and the money rolls in and it's
tremendous. It's just it's a [__]
lottery win.
hard work very pivotal to your um you
getting here today by the sands of it
especially in those early years as a
comedian after leaving Shell.
What role does hard work play in our
society? Um it's right in in becoming a
successful individual at whatever
pursuit or whatever passion you're
pursuing. There's a there's probably a
counternarrative that I think has
emerged in our country maybe because of
social media has allowed people to kind
of converge behind that and relinquish
responsibility of their situations by
calling hard referring to hard work as
being a really really sort of toxic
thing and I' I felt that more recently.
I didn't see it when I was younger.
I mean let's let's you know what let's
have a you gambling man. Uh
not it depends. I mean in life not in
the casino but yeah let's let's put a
bet on that. Let's see how that works
out for them.
I just don't think that's going to bring
him happiness.
Which part?
The hard work is toxic. Okay. Okay.
Don't do Don't do hard work then. Good
luck, dummy. It's just not going to work
for you. That's not going to pay out
because what's the metric of our
society? It's results, right? And I
don't care how there's two great myths
in our society, right? There's one myth
is talent and ideas, and there's another
myth which is hard work. They're both
[__] Total [__] [__] because
the the ideas are cheaper than table
salt, right? There's there's everyone's
got ideas. I've got an idea for an app.
It's the Uber for fill in the thing
here. Yeah. Great. Sure. Sure. It's
every idea is about implementation.
Every um sports is a good analogy,
right? So, Michael Jordan, greatest of
all time, right? There's no debate. He's
the greatest. How much did he work?
[__] more than anyone else. How much
natural talent did he have? More than
anyone else. What if he hadn't worked?
You never heard of him. He never would
have made the team, let alone been the
greatest, but wouldn't have even made
the team if he hadn't trained. It's a
good analogy for life of going, "Look,
whatever talent you have, if you don't
do the work as well, it's it's it's just
a waste of potential." So, I think it's
it's the absolute fundamental. Now, hard
work and drudgery are not the same
thing, right? Like there's a there's a
working smart and working hard and
there's a difference between the two.
Like if you're if you're working at
something and it's like hard work alone
won't do anything. You know, it's about
what stream you're in. And I suppose the
extreme example would be if you're
collecting um
you know recyclable metals on a FLLA
dump in South America. Work as hard as
you want. Nothing's ever g you're never
going to get to that level. So you you
work hard if you must and you work smart
if you can. If you can't, you know, if
anyone listening to this is already in a
privileged position in that, you know,
odds are western world doing okay, have
a digital phone. That's you're doing
better than a third of the world before
you even start. You know, most people
don't have running water. You know, most
people don't have a flushing toilet. The
world's in a [__] terrifying state.
So, it's that thing of going, well, work
as smart as you can. Work at the thing
that you're best at. I think school
teaches us maybe the wrong lesson.
School teaches us a lesson about
mediocrity and being all rounders. And
yet we live in a world that does not
reward all rounders. Who gives a [__]
about all rounders? If you if you get a
D in physics and you get an A in
English, I say just go to English
lessons because we're going to get you
up to a C-grade in physics. I tell you
what the world doesn't need someone
who's [__] at physics. Still still [__]
at physics with no natural. So find out
what you've kind of got a natural, you
know, that edge thing. Find out what you
have a natural ability for. What's the
thing that you do best? And again, I
would remind people it's not the best in
the world. Just better than anything
else you do. Lean into that. Like, I'm
all for following your dreams if your
dreams are what you're best at. And the
opinions of family and friends don't
count.
And then it's it's a little bit I
suppose it's a bit tough love. It's that
thing of going, look, look at what your
inner critic says, okay? And it won't be
wrong.
Look at what your inner critic says
about you. Walk back the cruelty and you
got to Okay, that's the reality. That's
the starting point.
I read that in your book and I was I was
in I was laying in bed. It was actually
your book I was listening to and I and
you said the thing about your inner
critic which a lot of people obviously
don't want to admit is their inner
critic is usually right. And I remember
sitting there thinking there that can't
be right. Let me check this. And then I
started listening to my inner critic for
a couple of seconds and I thought no
that's right. That's right. That's
right. But please expand on that idea of
the inner
the the idea of the inner critic is
going look I I went to a a fancy
university right and I think Cambridge
is where imposter syndrome was built and
there's there's a lot of imposter
syndrome in the world right you arrive
at a new workplace and you go Jesus they
must have made a mistake and got the
wrong CV and given me the job and oh cra
or I'm at this new college or I'm I'm at
this new I'm starting this thing and I
don't know what I'm doing that feeling
of I'm not enough and I don't know what
I'm
is why you buy the business management
for dummies book and [__] read it the
night before. It's what drives you to do
the homework. So I got to Cambridge and
I thought I'm not smart enough to be
here. And then I wor my [__] nuts off
and it turned out I was wrong. And I was
smart enough to be there and I did
really well because I [__] because I
was motivated by the I'm not good enough
to be here. I need to work. I need to
work hard. Uh you know, you start in
comedy and you go, "Oh my god, I've
given up everything to be a comedian.
And I've got 20 minutes of jokes that
work. I I'm going to need thousands of
jokes that work. They all have to work.
[__]
You get to work. What's the motivation?
What's the thing that wakes you up at 4
in the morning and you go, I need to
[__] do this. I can't rely on just
being, hey, I'm just going to wise
crack. And you know, asking a comic to
improvise an hourong show is like asking
a magician to do real magic.
The work is done in the gym. By the time
I get to the stage, I know it's going to
be a good show. I I've tried these jokes
on other people. I know we're a lock,
you know, 10 20% of the evening is about
the fun that happens in that room, the
messing around with the audience, the
the showing off the work that I've done
in the gym, the muscle memory of knowing
how to make people laugh. Great. But I'm
going to arrive ready.
There's something really interesting in
that when you're talking about the
reason why you succeeded at Cambridge is
because you didn't feel like you were
smart enough to be there and etc etc
etc. That also sounds a lot like what I
described when I said the reason why I
pursued money and trying you know tried
to be successful was because I felt
inadequate in my in myself and it became
this great motivator.
Yeah. And there's there's there's like a
there's a there's a plus to that and
then there's this potential danger in
but are we being a bit like you know
that that thing of going giving kids too
much self-esteem. Giving people not kids
necessarily because this is about life
stage right what we're talking about
here isn't about when you leave college
and when you're young and when you're
doing something right there'll be people
listening to this in their 40s that are
going to start a business and do
something [__] exceptional with their
lives.
There's people in their 50s that are
going to do that. There's people in
their 60s. I don't believe there's like
a a knockoff point.
People in their 70s,
you [__] those people.
The Delta variant dealt with them.
They're gone, man. There's none left.
I'm sorry. Hey, the good news is the
pensions crisis is over. But that thing
of like going, well, you're going to,
you know, people people do
people do extraordinary things if they
if but they they put the work in. And
and I think people lean into the myth of
like that thing of like, oh, he's a
genius. You you read, you know, Forbes
magazine or whatever about business
people doing incredibly well. It's like,
well, this guy's a genius.
Steve Jobs thing is though, genius.
Genius. Love Bill Gates. He's a genius.
And then you read about like these these
guys that are like finance guys. They
wake up at 5 in the morning and he only
sleeps for three hours a night and he
does so much and he knows everything and
he works so hard. It's always it's
always both. It's always both. And then
plus time you need, you know, that
10,000 thousand hours thing isn't isn't
wrong. It's just that's the minimum.
What could you stand to do for 10,000
hours that won't feel like drudgery?
What could you stand to do now for the
next 10 years of your life that won't
feel like uh this again?
And if you're only motivated by the
paycheck, it's like, well, how hard
could you work?
Quick one. As many of you know, I've
been trying to make my life a little bit
more sustainable as it relates to energy
ever since I sold my Range Rover Sport
and bought an electric bicycle. and My
Energy as a sponsor of this podcast are
one of the brands that make that
transition much much easier. They are at
the forefront of British renewable
eosmart technology and their products
are really really changing the game. If
you're on YouTube, you can see what I'm
holding in my hand. This is called the
Eddi, right? It's the UK's number one
solar power diverter. So, what is a
solar diverter? It's a device for people
like you and me. That means you can
divert your excess energy back into your
home rather than back into the grid,
which will save you power and money.
It's super userfriendly and easy to
install, and you can control it using
the My Energy app on your phone. To find
out more about this product and more
products like it that will help you make
that sustainable transition, head over
to myenergy.com. And um I highly
recommend you check out the Eddie. It's
um it's a real game changer, a product,
and one that I'm going to be installing
in my home soon. paychecks. You you
talked about one of the lessons you
brought over from your business career
was um branding. You you said one of the
the most important things you carried
over from your business career to stand
up is branding. You sell your
specialtity.
Yeah. I think that that thing like I
mean branding in a very loose sense,
it's that thing of like knowing how
you're perceived. So when you walk on
stage, if you're like suited and booted
and you look as if you're hosting a TV
show, how long is it going to be before
some dummy at a TV channel goes, "Who
should be hosting a TV show? This guy
looks the part." Like that thing of like
that simple thing of going, "This is a
visual medium. I'm standing in front of
people." I don't think it's not like
people go, "Oh, you know, if you don't
get them in the first five minutes,
you're in trouble." Five minutes, you're
having a laugh. If you don't get them in
the first on the before I've hit the
mic, they've made a decision about me in
a club. You know this guy. Oh, this guy
[__] knows. We can all relax. This
this guy knows what he's doing.
Take the wishing well.
Yeah. And it's like that thing of like
you go, you know, someone someone uh
faking confidence is exactly the same to
the casual observer. So that thing of
like what you're what what are you
faking? Fake being a good person to the
casual observer. It's the same.
Being a good person to the casual
observer. Tax. That seems like a good
segue.
Yeah. Well, I mean the tax thing is
really it's quite an interesting thing
when you get publicly shamed
uh that you kind you know you learn a
lesson. You you don't
I totally missed that.
Oh, okay. Well, I mean it's what
happened was there was a
the long story I suppose is
you have an accountant, right? And your
accountant says, "How much tax do you
want to pay?" Oh, there's a scheme. And
you go, "Yeah, great. Is it legal?"
Yeah.
They go, "Yeah, it's legal." And you go,
"Okay."
and they go, "Yeah, you can pay as much
as you want or pay this or it's it's
quite they use terms like it's quite an
aggressive scheme." And you go, "Okay,
but there's less tax and you get to keep
Okay, that's well that sounds good."
And I suppose every anyone that's ever
bought an ISA has done a tax avoidance
scheme.
That's a governmentbacked tax avoidance
scheme. So I was doing a bunch of those
and government enterprise initiative
things and trusts and quite complex
financial things. So the money was
rolling in and it was just all going
through the accountants out to these
things and one day it all caught up. So
one day I don't know how exactly I
presume HMRC leaked something but that's
okay. Uh and it went from being on the
cover of the paper to going you know
you've done an aggressive tax scheme.
This is morally wrong. And I'd never
thought of it as being moral. I'd never
I'd just gone well I pay as little as
you can and whatever. I'm still kicking
in a lot. Um, and it was just like I I
had that feeling. It was almost like um
suicide with a bungee rope. You felt
like you were losing everything and then
it kind of snapped back and it was okay,
but the sensation of what it would be
like to be cancelled. I've had that that
kind of, you know, not PTSD. I haven't
been in a bomb blast, but you know, you
have that feeling of like what that
would be like. Um,
so and then the prime minister comes out
and he's at the G20 and he does a press
conference where he talks about nothing
other than your tax affairs and how
morally representable you are and he's
the guy that brings in austerity and
gave us Brexit and you know Scottish
independence and whatever and you go a
[__]
this is going to be and then I'm doing a
topical comedy show that week where
we're talking about the most talked
about things and I'm the most talked
about thing. How did you actually feel
in that moment?
I was behind the scenes.
I had uh so the news broke on a Sunday.
I was I didn't sleep for about maybe
three days. I mean, you know, I didn't
sleep, you know, there's always an hour
here or there, but I was having panic
attacks. Uh and that sensation of a
panic attack, if you haven't had one, is
you you you can't get comfortable in
your own skin. You can't sit, you can't
stand, you can't eat, you can't drink,
you just like nothing feels right.
you're kind of just off. And I I took
some I took like a beta blocker on the
first day and then I had the meds. I had
like the beta blockers and the Valium
and the stuff I got like prescribed
enough to send me down a black hole
and then I didn't take anything. I just
had them as a talisman of like, okay,
I'll have that. But it was kind of panic
attacks and waves of that and uh guilt
and shame and you know hard lessons
because you find out who your friends
are.
So a couple of people that I was pretty
close to were
gleeful
were that guy's been brought down a peg
or two. Like it's a hard thing. It's a
hard thing to learn. And then some other
people stepped up to the plate, you
know, and you go, "Wow, that's I'm not
really interested in fair weather
friends." Like, everyone comes to a show
party. Of course they [__] do. The
show's party, baby. Um, but the people
that call you when you're at your lowest
and go, "Fine. I love you. You're you're
not the worst thing you've ever done."
You go, "Great."
And on that point, you you talk openly
about how you've had depressive bouts.
Yeah. I mean, I I spoke about it in the
book because I think it's a um I wanted
to kind of deliver on listen if I hadn't
talked about the tax thing in the book.
I think people readers would have felt
shortchanged
very much like HMRC did. Um but again
the depression and anxiety I suffer more
with anxiety than depression and I try
and see it in a very positive way. I try
and be as positive as I can in life and
go, so if I have an anxiety attack, you
go, well, that's sort of the flip side
of creativity, right? So, if you have a
mind that's worring all the time, you
know, sometimes it's going to wake you
up at 5 in the morning with a panic
attack, and that's all right. You know,
I can white knuckle that. I'm I'm lucky
that mine aren't that severe. It's not
like I'm better and braver than other
people with mental health problems that
need to medicate. Just lucky that it's
not as bad for me, but I'm I'm aware of
it. And I think talking about it does
help because all we have is talking
therapy. So if that talking therapy is
me someone listening to my book and and
going, "Oh, he seems all right and he's
he deals with this and he's going
through it and I know that I'm not alone
in this." Because the first time you
have a panic attack, it's it's [__]
terrifying because you think, "Is this
my forever now?"
Because it's all you can feel and it's
overwhelming and you go, "Well, is this
it? Is the first time you get
depressed?" the first time like a real
depression hits you, it's like, "Oh,
wow. This is a this is awful."
When was the first time?
Um, the first one was probably early
early 20s, like after college, like
a a black mood that just wouldn't shift.
And it was Yeah.
Yeah. It's pretty scary. And then I had
I had one in Australia a couple of years
ago 2018 where I and I could kind of see
what it was like there's a bit of your
mind that's like always you aware and it
was like I traveled that I I'd done like
160 flights that year and it was I did
Australia twice in a month and it's I
was so broken I was so stripped of
serotonin and I took a Valium to sleep
on the plane and that strips more
serotonin and I was just like it's the
inability to feel joy. Um, so I don't
know if you've had anyone die in your
life, but sometimes someone on their
deathbed, you make them their favorite
meal. You get the food from the
specialty. I remember going to see a
friend who was dying and we bought him
scotch eggs from Fortnham and Mason.
Like it's his favorite thing. And he
looked at him and he was grateful, but
he couldn't eat them because he just
didn't have an appetite. And when you're
depressed, it's the appetite for life is
just gone. It's just you haven't got it.
Um, but it's this too shall pass. you
know, the the that thing of going, well,
you can just,
you know, I can white knuckle it and
just kind of get through that and other
people can medicate for a couple of
weeks and then it's sort of okay. And do
you think these things are It's an
interesting question to ask and probably
quite naive, but do you think these
things are
a symptom of the way we live our lives?
panic attacks, depression, or do you
think they are
part of the innate human experience
regardless of the way that we live our
lives? I think it's a it's a great
question. I think uh I think depression
is a part of life. I think it's, you
know, probably people have always had
that and I think there is a um there's a
there's a benefit to these things.
There's a um uh it's not only negative.
You know, melancholy can be a very
beautiful thing. Sometimes it's very
appropriate to be down. You know, if
you're grieving someone, that's you
know, you talk about being depressed
when someone dies. You you it's grief.
It's a different sort of thing. That's
uh of course it's it's uh it's normal. I
think that thing about for me, I think,
you know, the nurture thing is the thing
that we can change. I'm a I'm I'm a
great believer that we could change and
do better. But yeah, maybe it's maybe it
is a symptom of how we're living our
lives and we could do better. You know,
I'm sure if I was doing um Iawaska every
weekend, I'd have less panic attacks,
but at the moment, I don't feel kind of
drawn towards that world, but I'm kind
of aware that that exists. I've kind of
got some friends in that world and I
kind I'm aware there's other I've got a
friend that was on anti-depressants for
30 years and started doing Iawaska and
is now off them now. It's not even
firsthand. It's definitely not
scientifically relevant. Don't take
medical advice from me kids. But it
strikes me that there are other ways.
There's other ways and that there's
ancient cultures that had this [__]
locked down.
You didn't lose your virginity till you
were 26.
Yeah. Very late. And again, I spoke
about that in the book because I think
there is a a perception in society that
it is a race and you need to do that
early and you need to be, you know,
[__] with a weaponsgrade dick because
everyone's watching Pornhub and, you
know, whatever. It's it's uh I thought
it was a nice thing to share because I
think some kid of 24 is going to read
that and go, I might be all right.
I might be normal.
You describe that as being a fear. I
remember very distinctly trying to have
sex when I was 16 and just being totally
[__] terrified because I thought my
penis was I thought it was I mean I
think I probably watched too much porn
or something at 16 or 17 but I was like
this is not a penis. This is
tiny in comparison to that.
I think we have to get our dicks now,
right? I think we have an ending for the
show.
I was like 15 and I and I totally
bottled it. What was it? Was it fear?
Was it I think it was you know I think
it's fear you know there's a lot of
other things going on obviously it's
like maybe a religious faith 15% of that
and maybe a little bit uh inshed is the
term they use where you're you know too
close to one parent and that maybe stops
you from forming bonds with uh with
other women so very close to my mother
and that stops you from kind of going
out and having normal relationships in
some sense you know there's a million
different reasons it kind of doesn't
matter it's like you everyone gets there
And the perception I think again in our
society and the reason to put it in the
book is because you go not embarrassed
give a [__] like I very happily talk
about it and you go don't get too caught
up in the reasons uh think about now
think about what matters I think you
know that school of therapy the Freudian
analysis that's all about why that
happened I give a [__] what are we going
to do about it
I like CBT and NLP more because it's
more like yeah what are we going to do
though what are we doing now what are we
doing today
NLP neural linguistic programming Yeah,
Peter Jones was talking to me a lot
about this on when we were having our
breaks in Dragon's Den. And what role
has NLP played in your life? What has it
done for you? And for those that don't
know, including me, what is it?
Um, neural linguistic programming is
like I suppose it came out of the um
West Coast human potential movement of
the 70s. It's a sort of almost like a
belief structure of for life. Uh, and
it's been you I think it's been used
nefariously a fair bit. You can find
some negative stuff on it online. I
happened to when I was working for
Shell, there was a budget for training.
And obviously, I'm not working on an oil
rig. I was like, "Okay, well, I'll just
I'll I'll I'll go on an NLP course."
It's like this kind of slightly
hippie-ish thing for a big oil
corporation to send you on. And the idea
of it is the map is not the territory.
It's like the fundamental questions in
life are going, "Look, your experience
of the world is not the same as everyone
else's.
And how you see things within the map
inside your mind is how the world is for
you. And you know so these premises of
like the quality of your communication
is the quality of your life
which made sense to me. Everything about
it I read this kind of I was taught by
this guy called Ian McDermott and
everything I he said like for you know
20 days on this course I just went agree
with all of this. I I it it everything
felt right to me about that. It felt
like, okay, they someone's given this a
lot of thought and we're all standing on
the shoulders of giants. We, you know,
and this seems like a pretty good way to
um to think about life.
Um so the idea that the map is not the
territory. The idea that you go, well,
you imagine how things are, you could
imagine it a different way. It's very
difficult to change how you think about
the world. Very difficult.
I don't
but it's so much easier than changing
the world.
The map is not the territory.
So you imagine the world, right?
Yeah. you imagine um London.
Yeah.
And the size of London and what it is.
What you have in your head isn't the
real thing.
It's your perception of it. It's your
perception of how things are in this
room is not the is not the same as my
perception of how they are in this room.
Um so it it it's it's different for
everyone.
The the idea and the analogy being
there's a map that's 2D and it tells you
right that's Britain, that's France. you
have an idea of what Britain looks like
from above. It's got [__] all to do with
reality.
No one's ever seen it from that angle.
So you you know those lines don't exist.
Those lines are man-made.
The the borders aren't real.
And how does that help you in in life?
Well, I think it's the idea of going
look, you can change the way that you
think about things. So I was thinking
about things in I can do I can do these
na this narrow bandwidth of things. My
belief system, the assumptions I'd made
about life were, well, you can get a job
and you can work for someone and after
you get a job and you work for 40 years,
you get a pension and when you get the p
I was on a conveyor belt.
Sure.
When suddenly I went, oh, I could
believe anything. I could believe that I
could do anything.
I could believe that I could be the guy
on the TV show telling jokes.
And you can. What you believe dictates
your life. You'll you'll be the barrier.
You'll be the thing that stops you.
No one else. You know, people spend a
lot of time worrying about other people.
Oh, what what if they don't help me?
What if they don't? You're going to be
the thing that holds you back.
You said that the best goals are those
without like the destination,
right?
The the I mean, listen, it's the the the
Listen, this is very self-helpy chat,
right? So, we are legally obliged to say
at some point it's the journey, not the
destination. We have to say that. But
getting there isn't half the fun. It's
all the fun.
So, what's next for you?
Okay. Well, I have plans. I always have
plans, but I have quite grand plans.
If you if you say now that you want to
make a billion dollars, I'm going to
delete this episode.
Uh, I'm trying to get better at comedy.
I've been sort of going about 20 years
and I'm trying to change up my style a
little bit. So, I do, this is inside
baseball. People, you can switch off now
if you're not interested in comedy. So,
I do oneliners. I Everything's a fast
ball, right? And I do sort of three a
minute on stage and I try and get people
into a state where they're
they can't breathe, where they're
laughing so much, where they're a joyful
experience, where they can't remember
anything I said, but they remember how I
made them feel and I made them feel so
happy. That's what I want to do. Okay,
I'm trying to change that a little bit.
I'm trying to change it up. So, I'm
doing I'm trying to write routines
between sort of seven and 12 minutes
long. Trying to write longer pieces with
a bit more to them. So, I'm trying to
sort of find a It's been really
interesting with the book and with
coming on podcasts like this of like
finding a different voice. So, go I'm a
public figure. I've been on TV for 20
years, pretty famous. I've never spoken
like this before. Right. So, we've just
done a couple of podcasts recently where
I'm chatting to people as I am. And you
go, okay, so that's there's a serious
side to me and then there's a a funny
side to me. People are nuanced and
complicated and great. And I'm trying to
bring a little bit of who I am to the
stage now. I'm trying to reveal a little
bit more about me and that's a very
exciting prospect and so writing a new
show. So I'm sort of halfway through a
tour and I kind of pushed the [__] it
button and recorded a special that's
going to come out at Christmas and I've
written new stuff.
Why?
I just go out and do new stuff.
It's exciting.
It's it's like the the trying new stuff,
doing new things, trying trying to get
people to a different state. So, it's a
little bit for the for the agilation of
it because you kind of go, well, I want
it to be a better experience for the
audience, but also I want more applause
breaks. I want it to be a um a higher
volume laugh. You know, there's a
there's a it's difficult to describe,
but there's like there's there's a laugh
that you go everyone in the room
laughed, bang, but then it's gone. and
then get them again. Bang. And then and
then it's gone. You want a rolling
laughter. You want, you know, I want to
get better. I want to get better. I've
seen people that are better than me on
stage with worse material with with
worse jokes. He goes, "So, you want to
get better as a performer and you want
to get better as a writer and it feels
like there's I feel like I'm at base
camp. I've got the kit. I've got the
right gear and I'm I'm on the mountain,
but we haven't got anywhere near the
summit." And that's for me tremendously
exciting as a guy in his late 40s to go,
"Oh, we're just starting." Most of the
great comics that I love did their best
work in their 50s.
Inside your book, in the front cover,
and this is my um last question for you,
it says that one of the things the book
will help you understand is the meaning
of life.
Pretty profound.
I'll do it in five words.
Okay. enjoying the passage of time.
That's it. It's enjoying the passage of
time.
It's it's the chances of us being here
now are so small. The chances of us
existing, it's it's you know, if you
look at the if you look at the stats,
the it's not just our parents had to get
together at that moment, but their
parent, their parents, their parents,
their going back a billion years as we
climbed out of the soup. The chances of
this happening are
incalculable. And yet, we're here and we
have this shot and we're breathing and
we're healthy and we're This is
incredible. Enjoying the passage of time
is about it's about all I got and it's
enough.
Thank you. Um I I found your, you know,
your book incredibly refreshing for so
many reasons. because it was laced with
humor, but because it was so inclusively
written as a self and so relatable as a
I kind of felt like it was lowhanging
fruit the self-help thing because you go
well Echart tole is amazing but he does
not know his way around a dick joke
and you know and and Jordan Peterson
great 21 rules for life but it's like
it's quite pitchy.
Yeah. Yeah.
tone, you know, so you go actually
sugaring the pill and going, "Look,
there's this great interesting world out
there and I think this is like a I think
this book is a gateway drug.
I think this is marijuana. This is like
some really mellow
weed and it'll lead you in a different
direction and like maybe oh, okay, well,
I need to read some more stuff by him or
I need to investigate that or that
sounds interesting." and the honesty you
start the book with, even confronting
the fact that there's a stigma to
writing self-help books, it immediately
builds trust very early that you're not
going to [__] me and you're not
going to try and be anybody you're not
in this book. And so I as I as I
listened into the audio book and the
chapters passed, you'd established this
really high degree of trust with me
because you kind of had pointed at the
elephant in the room so early.
It's it's interesting that thing of like
the the experience you had as well about
the inner critic
where you engaged with the book
Yeah. to a to a degree where you went,
is that true? Is that you? It's it's
it's an interesting thing to be able to
give someone that I haven't met
something that is essentially very tough
love.
Yeah, I know it was. And the other thing
that was even tougher love was at one
point you say that I am the person I am
when no one's watching. And at that
exact moment as I'm in my boxer shorts
with the pot noodle like spilt on my
belly and it's like 2:00 a.m. in the
morning, I'm thinking this is who the
[__] I am. Look,
I like I swear I I feel like I sat up in
the bed, it was like
I love I love that thing though of going
like if you're listening to this in the
car
and you just threw a beer can out the
window, you go, "Yeah, that's who you
are." And that's not terrible. You just
have to be okay with that. It's a good
It's I think honesty is one of the great
superpowers of comedians because
everything's built on that level of like
people aren't going to get the joke if
it's not honest.
Yeah. Yeah. But it's it that bedrock of
like acceptance is a great first step.
Look, you are where you are. It's not
where you're going to end up.
And you know, I think I I get the
feeling a lot of people listening to
this podcast are looking for something.
They're looking for kind of a a steer.
And it's it's you know, there's going to
be movement. You're going to you're
going in the right direction. Just the
desire to get there is enough to get you
started.
Well, thank you. It's um I'm so
incredibly happy you wrote this book
because it also showed me as someone
I've watched on TV since I was a child.
Of course, I've been around a long time,
baby.
And uh so it's also surreal meeting you
because as I said, you know, one you're
one of the people that I sat there in my
house in Plymouth, that whole place that
you described,
um and I I watched you growing up and I
knew one side of you. I knew the the
quick jokes. I literally remember the
sketch you did where you said you come
up on stage and you say, "I'm going to
do as many [__] oneliners as I can."
And you just hammer them all out. and
reading this book and also meeting you
today as exactly what you've described
as your kind of ambition, I've come to
learn a how unbelievably [__] smart
you are. I didn't actually know you'd g
to Cambridge until I read about it. Um b
how um multifaceted you are as a sort of
philosophical thinker and see your
incredible ability to weave that all
together and to shine lights on really
important truths in society. And that's
why when you told me that your ambition
going forward is to bring a bit more
content, we'll say, and a little bit
more probably profound meaning, I don't
know, to to to your to your comedy.
You know what it is? I saw Chappelle the
other week.
Really?
And I shock people.
Yeah.
And he disturbs people.
And what I need to do is disturb people.
Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, you have all the
everything it takes to do that because
you really are a genius in your own
right. So, you're way too kind. But
thank you. It's been a a pleasure. Now,
I have to write a question for the next
Yes, you have to write a question. So,
all of our
Did they write me a question? Okay. What
do we do first? Do I get the question
first?
I'm going to ask you the question first.
So, all of our guests leave a question
in the diary. Okay.
As they leave and they don't actually
know who they're leaving the question
for, which is interesting.
Right.
We had Patrice Evra, who's a Manchester
United football legend.
Is this Is this going to be about the
offside rule? Is this going to catch me
out?
It's not.
Okay. In fact, interestingly, this is a
question which changed his life when his
his partner asked him this question one
day and it
disturbed, troubled and caused a sense
of introspection that made him really
really consider this seriously and that
changed his life. That was the catalyst.
So when I said to him to write a
question, I looked down at what he had
written and it was the question he
described on this podcast. So listeners
of last week's episode will know will
know this question coming. Okay, the
question is,
are you happy?
Yeah,
it's a great question.
Yes,
it is a really great question.
It's really good. It's beautiful.
Yeah,
it's beautiful. And I think you know um
that thing I said earlier about like be
lucky. I had a friend a friend's father
when I was a kid would always say be
lucky. And I remember thinking it was
ridiculous because you can't be lucky
but that you know from the the German
luck is uh happy
be happy.
I think it's a it's a powerful thing to
aspire to you know enjoying the passage
of time is my answer for the meaning of
life but to be happy is everything and I
think you are responsible for your
happiness. you know, uh, objectivism and
hangrand get given a hard time, I think,
because I think people have conflated
pleasure and happiness and they think
those guys are just hedonistic fools.
But you being happy is better for the
world. You know, when you're on a plane
and it's going down and the oxygen masks
come, you have to grab your mask first
or you're no good for anyone else. You
being happy makes the people around you
happier, better for your friends, better
for your family, better for the world.
It's a great question.
Weirdly, my my one of my ex my
ex-girlfriend asked me that question one
day and I felt really defensive and like
she had like really vulnerable when she
asked me it and I thought I thought I
was happy and I still think I was in
that moment. But there's something about
that question which really strips you to
your essence and like I think it's it's
very nicely framed as well. I like the
way you asked it and I like the silence
around it because it's often that thing
of like conversation is that the the
pace is a bit too it's too quick with
filling silences and actually something
you kind of sit with am I happy
you know and listeners it's almost
impossible that you won't have answered
that question
and if you're not know that that's okay
because it's going to change and you
know happiness I think is about like
that it's the base state isn't it it's
that thing of you know what's your base
state what's what's going on with you
are you a happy person generally are you
able to um deal with the stimulus of
life and still maintain
I suppose I need to put a question in
the right question
okay thank you
please excuse my terrible penmanship do
we do the question on a or do we do
after
I'm going to come in give you the book
and then you scribble the And thank you
so much T.
My pleasure. Hey for me.
[Music]